Roach Smith, M. (2011). The memoir project: a thoroughly non-standardized text for writing & life (First edition). Grand Central Publishing.



Marion Roach Smith
Listened to it in 2019 [The Memoir Project.md]
Bought in Audible and listening again in 2014


Write what you know

Write what you fear / write what scares you
mls: some things that scare me are failure, being a fool, being ignored, not respected or not respectable, to be found out as one not having integrity, being betrayed, my child or grandchild growing up in a hard world and not being prepared, losing family, losing respect, being ashamed. I am afraid of being one of those people in the nursing home that we used to visit - lonely, warehoused. I'm afraid of being worthless and useless and having no value in the world and having nothing to offer. Afraid of not being smart emough to understand the world around me.

We are all afraid at the margins of our roles (for me, husband, dad, grandad, son, brother)

if you are writing about your 8-year-old self then write from the perspective of an 8-year-old, using only 8-year-old concepts and language.  Do not quote any movies do not bring in pop culture awareness and do not bring in the later inside of your teenage self. Maybe this perspective will help you understand something that has been puzzling you.


People are intrigued in the process. It can be a good flow to connect moment of intuition to moment of action. Chapter 5

Chapter 4
 Around the fourth paragraph of an essay and earlier in a blog post the reader needs to know what's at stake what they're going to lose if this issue at stake is taken away 

Chapter 3 
She calls it the vomit draft. Rachael Herron calls it the shitty draft.

 Get it all out there The cheesy sayings the aphorisms the sound bites the cliches the shop warrant things all of it You're not trying to word Smith the vomit draft You're trying to get the stereotypes and just all the debris in your brain out there this is where you're not restating stuff your externalizing the vague notions they're laying around You're just giving it some shape and some placeholders and some points along the way You're going to come back and clean things up you will prune you will cut out you will tighten your reorganize and eventually you will find the right ways to say the things that are on the page but you can't find the right way to say the thing that's not on the page yet so that's the point You're getting the notions out and then you're going to clean it up and say it right and say it better later 

Chapter 2
 One of the biggest things that holds people back from writing is fear of what the family will say this resonates very very deeply with me. She says write the piece Don't pick out your outfit for the today show just yet You haven't even published it yet and also in the same vein don't worry about what your family is going to say they are reading it yet. Write it revise it work with it let's see what we've got and then let's go from there boom You have permission to write 

chapter 1
Important - the algorithm: this is x and it is an illustration of y
This is a comedy and the illustration is a visit to the proctologist 
No: this is a tragedy and the illustration is my marriage - too big. Find a moment. 
"Capture the moment of a-ha, and you'll find one specific story that you can drive forward."
You are putting the story at the center, "what is this about" is the center, not you

Repeat this: I am not the story. I am the illustration.

Question - what is this about? 
People often start to answer with the details of how they will illustrate

A blog post or commercial essay can be reduced to one word 
That one word will appear in the pitch: the sentence that describes the book

I'm interested in your snivelling only if it elevates my own

Her dad used to say, Write everything like you write a letter home. In a letter home, you aren't trying to impress. You are the small dog. You are writing to express what you are thinking, feeling, going through

